
Prediction: I knew you were going to say that!


In some ways prediction is a bit like estimation.
For example both can be more or less well-informed.
When you are at the horse races and there is a two-horse race - one of the horses looks old and fat like Paul, and the other younger and fitter like Rob - 
then you might predict that the Rob-horse will win.
But when you do your numbers on the lottery, this is just a guess.

Also like with estimation, it is likely to be sensible to build in 
limits to the accuracy of a prediction.
If you predict _exactly_ how tall a child born today will be at age 10,
then you will get it wrong. 
But if you guess aiming for a 5cm range of possibilities (and you do a bit of research about typical heights by age) then you have a reasonable chance. 


One form of prediction is interpolation:
this is prediction based on what happened before.
What you can do in the way of interpolation depends on how much data you have on what happened before.
Everybody's favourite is LINEAR interpolation.
For this you have two previous data points: x1 and x2, and the prediction is:
x3 = x2 + (x2-x1)
Another good one is CONSTANT interpolation.
For this you have one previous data point, and the prediction is: no change.
If you have three previous data points then you could use something which generalises the two methods above, called QUADRATIC interpolation.
And indeed there are a sequence of generalisations like this.
But this is a good example of where just using the maths without a little thought is a bad idea!...
Suppose I tell you the temperature at midday on the Headrow (in Leeds) every day for a decade. The method above will give you a complicated (but computable) formula for a prediction for the temperature tomorrow.
But it will not be a good one.
What would we spot if we plotted a graph of this decade's worth of data?
And what is wrong with our (`polynomial') interpolation?
(Discussion hints:
What are seasons and why do they come around in a cycle?
What is a quadratic function? And is there a quadratic function that repeats cyclically?)

...Now we are on the verge of getting into... Mathematical modelling!

