
Let's think a little more about Arrow's Theorem
from the Voting lecture/presentation...

Arrow's Theorem is the one that is about ways of converting a collection of
individual rankings by voters of candidates A,B,C,... in an election, 
to an election outcome - a ranking of the candidates that we may attribute 
to society collectively.
 
The starting point is to say that there are three reasonable requirements 
for a fair way of doing it:
  (R1) `Unanimity': if every individual voter prefers candidate A to B then the vote outcome should too;
  (R2) `IIA': the outcome's relative ordering just of A and B should not 
depend on someone changing where they order C, but with no change to the order of A and B;
  AND FINALLY
  (R3) No single person should determine the outcome.
 
The Theorem says "there is no fair system"!


Q1. Does it mean Maths is useful, or not?!



Q2. How can we ``prove'' something like that Theorem?

Here is a little glimpse...

Recall the theorem. In particular it implies:
Any system that obeys unanimity and IIA (Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives) is a `dictatorship'.
(Can you see why this is what the Theorem implies?)

Let's think about a claim that is clearly related:
If every voter ranks candidate A either best or worst, then so does any vote system
obeying the three fairness assumptions.

Let's suppose this is NOT true.

Then there is a voting system where there are further candidates B,C 
and possible individual rankings by voters of the candidates (as above)
so that the election result is B>A>C.
(Explicitly A is NOT either first or last here.)

Let's call the voting system F. And lets call the pile of completed voting
papers S. F is a `machine' for reading S and producing an election result 
from this collection of votes. In maths we write this result as F(S).
(That is just a shorthand acknowledging that the result depends on 
the set S of votes cast, and also on the method F of synthesising a decision
from this set.)
We think of F as a machine that takes a pile of completed voting papers
as input and produces an election result as output.
The input is the collection of rankings of all the candidates by the
individual voters. And the output is society's collective decision 
on the rankings of candidates - the election outcome.

For example F might take S and simply count the number of first place votes
for each candidate, and then rank according to this number.

Notice that the `machine' F is fixed once and for all in a given electoral
system. Different elections might produce different outcomes,
but that is because the set S of individial votes might be different.
That is, F(S) and F(S') might not be the same if S and S' are not the same.

Now we can do a thought-experiment with our fixed voting system F by 
considering different sets S of actual individual votes.
Given such a set S, we could consider a slightly different set S' where
someone has votes slightly differently. The `machine' F will tell us a
result for the scenario S' too.

So, let's start with a vote set S. And here we are assuming it is the 
one we mentioned above in which F(S) has B>A>C.

Now we will take the vote set S and use it as a starting point to 
construct a slightly different scenario S'. 
(We can think of this as the same election, with the same system F, 
and the same voters i,j,k,... say; but
taking place in a parallel universe perhaps.)
To get S' from S 
we will adjust the individual rankings so that if person i has 
A ranked top, move C up to second. 

And for each person j with A bottom move C top.

This does not change any voter's preference between A,B.
So by IIA the result still has B>A.
That is, F(S') still has B>A.

And similarly it has A>C. (Can you see the argument?)

But now every individual has C ranked over B. 
So... by Unanimity, C>B, and hence C>A in the result.
A contradiction!


....OK, that's enough for now.  :-)



3. How could we try to get around it?

Notice that it only applies to systems with more than 2 candidates.
Could we find a way to reduce to a sequence of 2-candidate elections,
and always use a fair system (majority) for those?




References
http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~dquint/econ698/lecture%202.pdf


